knowledge wealth and Constructors these
are reflections on some excerpts from
the philosophy of Constructor Theory
published in 2013 by David Deutsch in
the epistemology Journal synthesay
knowledge is an abstract catalyst
or a Constructor that transforms
physical reality it turns our imaginings
into tangibles knowledge builds over
time objective improvements are made
everywhere everywhere but science is the
most obvious case in point the
predictions that one theory in physics
makes like Newtonian physics can be
improved by a new successor Theory like
quantum theory or relativity Newton's
theory of gravity could in principle be
used for a GPS system but the accuracy
would be on the level of to the nearest
few hundred meters or so something like
that GPS programs with general
relativity is capable of a resolution or
accuracy of millimeters but whatever the
kind of knowledge and there are two
basic kinds explanatory and genetic it
is rather often the case that
predictions even in principle cannot be
made and the theory will tell us why
Darwinism for example explains why we
cannot predict what kind of creatures
will evolve because the process is blind
the mutations are as random as anything
can in this universe be random literally
cosmic rays from the other side of the
universe can come crashing through the
atmosphere striking DNA causing a
germline genetic code mutation and this
can be the cause of some radical change
to an organism leading to a new species
that cosmic ray causing just that change
cannot possibly have been predicted by
any of our knowledge and law here on
Earth when it comes to much of the
output of human beings who literally
create explanations and make choices
based on those explanations choices that
could not otherwise have been made
unless those explanations have been
created
this whole process can itself not be
predicted the content of future theories
cannot be predicted therefore choices
made on the basis of those theories
themselves could not have been predicted
ahead of time we cannot know the content
of theories yet to be thought and so we
cannot possibly make predictions about
the future state of the world when that
future state will depend upon theories
no one's thought of yet but they will as
David Deutsch has observed it wasn't
just that people in the 1800s weren't
able to predict the possibility of
nuclear Holocaust in the 20th century
because it's an intractably complex
problem but rather they couldn't even
conceive of what nuclear weapons were
because Nuclear Physics was entirely
unknown then so people today making
predictions about what disaster will or
will not befall people in the coming
Century are in the same place as the
brightest minds of the early
Enlightenment were with respect to us
today they say simply cannot conceive of
what knowledge we would have they the
people of the early Enlightenment
Geniuses though they were could not
conceive of what knowledge we would have
now so any prediction they tried to make
back then about what the world would be
like now was based on the physics and
Science and philosophy of the 17th 18th
and 19th centuries none of which even
mentioned for example nuclear fission
and fusion what will we discover this
Century to completely change the
calculus of our modern day profits but
besides knowledge is not only about
predictions anyway as we have said
that's the rare exception the whole way
of framing our situation with respect to
knowledge is being merely an instrument
for predicting what will happen in the
future completely misses the point
better theories explain more about what
really exists from general relativity we
get curved space time we get black holes
and gravitational waves we get an
expanding Universe none of these things
are at all even mentioned under
Newtonian gravity better theories tell
us more about what actually exists and
what the causal relationships between
them are and they tell us what is
possible and impossible in other words
they rule out more and all of that has
as a kind of byproduct some of the time
like for example in physics and the
physical sciences more broadly it allows
sometimes for predictions to be made
those predictions can be tested against
reality this capacity for our claims
about physical reality to be tested
itself is embedded as a governing
principle into physical reality but
testing is not straightforward or
trivial which is to say that when there
is disagreement between an observational
test and a theory we don't just throw
out the theory the test itself could
always be flawed as David Deutsch writes
in the philosophy of Constructor Theory
quote tests always depend on background
knowledge assumptions about other laws
and how measuring instruments work
that's from popper 1963. logically
should any Theory fail a test one always
has the option of retaining it by
denying one of those assumptions indeed
this has been used as a critique of the
very idea of testability for example
Putnam 1974 but scientific theories are
not merely predictions they are
primarily explanations claims about what
is there in the physical world and how
it behaves and the negation of an
explanation is not an explanation so a
claim such as there could be an
undetected particle carrying off energy
is not a scientific theory nor is
perhaps energy is not conserved those
are research proposals not explanations
consequently the methodology of science
includes the rule that any proposal to
modify a background knowledge assumption
must itself be a good explanation end
quote so raising objections to good
explanations does not mean you've
created a new Theory you might be
raising reasonable or less reasonable
critiques but the denial of a good
explanation is as David says there not
itself a good explanation and good
explanations are what we are striving to
improve that is what knowledge creation
by people is primarily about knowledge
is the most cosmically significant
entity in all of physical reality when
looked at over the long run as David
also writes and later in the same paper
under the subheading knowledge quote the
most important kind of abstract
Constructor is knowledge knowledge is
information which once it is physically
instantiated in a suitable environment
tends to cause itself to remain so it
survives criticism testing random noise
and error correction here I am adopting
poppers 1972 conception of knowledge in
which there need be no knowing subject
for example the knowledge encoded in an
organism's DNA consists of abstract
genes that cause the environment to
transform raw materials into another
instance of the organism and thereby to
keep those abstract genes and not
mutations or other variants of them
physically instantiated despite the
mutation of natural selection that keep
happening similarly the ideas
constituting the abstract Constructor
for preserving the ship of Theseus would
have had to include not only some
relatively arbitrary information about
the historical shape of the ship but
also knowledge of how to cause Athenians
to preserve those ideas themselves
through the generations and to reject
rival ideas now consider again the set
of all physically possible
Transformations for almost every such
transformation the story of how it could
happen is the story of how knowledge
might be created and applied to cause it
part of that story is in almost all
cases the story of how people
intelligent beings would create that
knowledge and of why they would retain
the proposal to apply it in that way
while rejecting or amending rival
proposals so a significant determinant
is moral knowledge hence from The
Constructor theoretic perspective
physics is almost entirely the theory of
the effects that knowledge abstract
Constructors can have on the physical
world via people but again the
prevailing conception conceals this end
quote that's the prevailing conception
both of physics and of knowledge of this
entire way of viewing the world and
indeed the prevailing view of morality
for what it's worth and David says
they're via people but it's not about
people when it comes to knowledge
knowledge is created by people but it's
not about them in the main which is to
say David is not mentioning
psychological States like certainty or
belief in his Constructor theoretic
conception of knowledge which extends
what popper already had in mind that
conception of knowledge yes says that
people are far more significant in the
universe than any other conception says
perhaps even more significant than
religious conception say and certainly
more significant than any Justified
belief conception of knowledge would
lead us to think by the way I say more
significant even than what the religious
people think because the conception we
get from the beginning of an infinity
and the work of David Deutsche is that
people become increasingly more powerful
and gain more and more control over the
universe becoming like Gods themselves
this is completely different to the
conception you get from religion where
in most religions people are yes
important to the cosmic scheme of things
but not so important that they can
become like God
but we are saying that people can
asymptotically approach the omnipotence
of God we can gain more and more control
we cannot gain complete control but at
least we can gain ever more power
something denied to us supposedly by the
existing conceptions be they religious
or rational certainly under this view we
are way more significant than the
Justified belief conception of knowledge
would have us think about knowledge
knowledge is not just about the contents
of human Minds it's the thing that
transforms the world but we do need more
than just knowledge to do the
transforming we also need resources and
knowledge and resources together gives
us wealth and even wealth is not
primarily about people as David goes on
to write quote wealth in Constructor
Theory it is natural to Define wealth as
an entity in a non-anthropocentric way
as the set of Transformations that the
entity would be capable of Performing
without generating new knowledge wealth
is always consisted fundamentally of
knowledge even though it has been
limited by the capacity of relatively
fixed installations for harnessing
naturally occurring resources once
Universal Constructors exist it will
consist almost entirely of knowledge end
quote that's a powerful statement if
when we have the universal Constructor
then resources will be cheap because
they are ubiquitous we just need Mata
and Mata is everywhere even in empty
space you find hydrogen and the
universal Constructor could transform
that into anything that you like
therefore the only thing slowing down
progress at that point is simply knowing
how the knowledge the program in order
to instruct the universal Constructor to
construct whatever it is that you want
knowledge is therefore at the heart of
constructive theory it's no accident
that throughout this paper on the
philosophy of Constructor Theory
knowledge plays this Central role indeed
David concludes his entire paper with
the word knowledge I recommend people
read the entire thing but let me go
straight to the conclusion and read that
it's only brief near David Wright says
his conclusion quote the principles of
construct a theory that I have proposed
may be false for instance the
composition principle in the form stated
in section 1.2 may only be an
approximation but if the idea as a whole
is false something else will have to
remedy the deficiencies of the
prevailing conception the prevailing
conception being Dynamic laws and
initial conditions of physics David goes
on something else will unify emergent
level the laws such as the Turing
principle and the principle of
testability with the other laws of
nature something else will provide an
exact statement of the second law of
Thermodynamics and a full statement of
the content of conservation laws a
different approach will generalize the
theory of computation and Von Neumann's
Constructor Theory and support laws
about substrate independent quantities
such as information and incorporate into
fundamental physics the fact that the
most significant quantity affecting
whether physical Transformations happen
or not
is knowledge end quote end of the paper
what determines whether physical
Transformations happen or not is
knowledge fundamentally it's the most
significant thing knowledge knowledge is
information that gets copied it solves a
problem and so it's useful in other
words knowledge is information with
causal power a lot of information is
useless it gets discarded but the stuff
that is written down and copied over and
again that's the stuff we say we know
and do not forget about
increasingly the most significant kind
of knowledge is explanatory an
explanation is a hard to vary account of
what exists what it does how and why it
solves some problem with knowledge that
existed before it was created and serves
as a solution in doing so it goes on to
solve other problems the creator of the
knowledge never dreamed of this is
called reach like likely Einstein never
thought of the GPS system as we know it
today and yet here we are using it every
day whenever we open Google Maps
knowledge is an abstract Catalyst of a
kind it is information that solves a
problem and so has causal power it
changes or transforms the world around
us it is substrate independent like many
abstract things this means it can be
represented in various physical forms
while being identical to none of them
what I am doing right now at this very
moment is communicating to you knowledge
about knowledge that we call
epistemology and to me this is neurons
firing in my brain and ideas in my mind
those are two levels of emergence that
talk about exactly the same phenomenon
which then become Taps on a keyboard
because I wrote this script and I'm
reading it now they then become
illuminated as pixels on the screen and
then they become words that I am
speaking so the neurons become light
which then becomes sound waves and then
they have to get transmitted somehow to
you so become electrical signals in a
computer system and a different kind of
light yet again as they travel through
optic fibers all encoded as a sequence
of zeros and ones or rather the presence
or absence of light and electrical
potentials when it is transmitted to
your computer and routed through many
others we call the internet and
eventually well it ends up once again as
electricity and magnetic forces in your
computer causing the vibration of a
thing called a speaker somewhere near
your ear that vibrates the air so you
can hear it because your eardrum is
vibrating and all of that is converted
back into a chemical electrical signal
along your auditory nerve to your brain
where it gets interpreted once again
moreover knowledge more broadly can be
represented in objects like books or
objects like a telescope which
instantiates the knowledge of how to
collect focus and magnify light from
objects to form an image or another
other example I like recently is a
bridge which instantiates knowledge
about a part of engineering physics
called Statics so that the Thing Remains
up especially something complex like a
suspension bridge that takes a lot of
Highly explicit explanations of things
like classic Newtonian physics and
geology and material science and
chemistry and so it goes you may want to
be able to explain to people should they
ask why this thing this suspension
bridge should stay up at that point you
don't have to rest upon trusting that it
will or confidence that it will or your
belief that it will rather it's about
the presence of a set of good
explanations that anyone if they really
wanted to could check and would be able
to understand you can know which is to
say understand that Engineers also know
what they're doing and understand the
relevant physics and the engineers who
build the bridge know that the
geologists who say the rock foundations
are strong and are not going to shift
have good explanations themselves and
everyone knows that the materials
scientists and chemists can explain why
the steel of which the structure is made
won't corrode too soon well not before
the processes that are used to slow all
this take effect everyone knows that
things do Decay errors happen so
maintenance needs to be done just in
time and regularly this is error
correction all because we know that
there exists good explanations of modern
bridge building the bridge itself
contains knowledge and if a space-faring
alien visited Earth from a planet which
was purely gas and every city they ever
knew floated and bridges like ours were
utterly unknown to them because nothing
ever had to be anchored to the solid
crust of a terrestrial planet because
they're not coming from a terrestrial
planet and they hadn't really thought
through what it would be like to live on
a terrestrial planet they could even if
no one was there to explain to them
reverse engineer the bridge and extract
from it the knowledge we had about all
the those things I mentioned from
Material Science through to Newtonian
physics to understand and therefore
explain exactly what it was for the
knowledge really is in the bridge not
written as words or symbols but
literally in the relationships between
the beams and cables of the roadway and
the pylons and so on and so forth
that's some substrate Independence and
so too as I say with my conveying all of
this from here to wherever you are right
now the knowledge I have gets to you by
going through all those different kinds
of materials represented in everything
from light and sound through to
electricity and magnetism and even
chemicals inside of your brain but it's
the same knowledge modulo errors and
modulo your different interpretations of
my intentions so that is what knowledge
is about at no point you will notice did
I refer to psychology human minds and
their emotions of certainty or belief or
confidence our proverbial aliens reverse
engineering the bridge extracted out
explanations of physics and Material
Science that humans would have used to
construct the thing but they do not
extract out our confidence and belief
they extract theories of science at no
point that they need to refer to our
confidence they refer instead to how
people understood physics as they can
and do likely a lot better than what we
do because they cross the Galaxy in a
spacecraft far more advanced than
anything we've got in short the
knowledge people have about physics and
bridge building is just that physics and
Bridge Building psychology and emotion
is there but only as intention the
people hoped one day to cross some water
or a Chasm more quickly than what they
could without the bridge they intended
to do so and made a choice to build a
bridge and then they had a new Choice
available to them use the bridge rather
than rowing across the water hope and
intention got the project going but from
there on motivation drove them but it
was objective rational science they
applied knowledge of the physical world
to check the knowledge was a genuine
good explanation required no emotions we
leave emotion out of it and just by the
way aliens would be people too just like
humans are people
AGI artificial general intelligence
would be people people are the entities
that create explanations no other system
creates new explanations people have
problems uniquely and we solve them
uniquely that is our defining
characteristic a cat may have a problem
of being hungry but it slavishly follows
its instincts it seeks out food and it
eats if there's no food in its house
it's stuck it can't open the door it
can't call for help nothing it's
repertoire of possible behaviors is
bounded utterly by its programming its
genetic code it's instincts a person on
the other hand may have the problem of
being hungry but actively avoid food
because they are obese and choose not to
eat as they are dieting and realize
eating more is not good for them despite
their hunger an anorexic person and may
have an explanation completely false
that their hunger is a false signal
given they're actually incorrect theory
that they are obese when they are not
people routinely defy their instincts
cats and dogs and all other animals
never go through this kind of thing
conjecturing new ideas about the world
anything about the world only people do
a person who runs out of food
understands they can buy more food they
can call a delivery service just leave
their house and talk to someone and ask
for food the possibilities are quite
literally unbounded and not contained in
their genetic codes their mind creates
new ones as soon as the old ones fail
the ideas that succeed are typically
remembered they are information that
works to solve a problem they constitute
knowledge perhaps not perfect never
perfect but definitely worth remembering
copying in other words until a better
idea comes along to replace it and even
then we sometimes remember the old idea
because it's still useful in certain
situations whatever the problem is we
can begin generating guesses whatever
the problem is that makes us Universal
Universal in our capacity to have
problems and to respond to them often we
fail but invariably we also make
progress as sometimes we succeed all of
this taken together leads to David
Deutsch's deep insights people are
Universal explainers this is in addition
to that other kind of universality where
whatever the physical process is can be
simulated to arbitrary accuracy by a
universal computer that's called the
universality of computation and one set
of physical processes that can be
simulated by a computer is what a brain
does So in theory what a brain does can
be simulated by a universal computer
what our mind mind adds to this is that
the physical processes can be modeled
and comprehended in principle by a
person the denial of this just says that
some things are
incomprehensible and that's isomorphic
with the claim that the mind of the
literal god of the abrahamic religions
for example who is an omniscient being
is literally incomprehensible in other
words an appeal to the supernatural some
rationalists who deny a belief in God
nonetheless endorse the notion that some
things are beyond the comprehension of
people they swap God for X where X is
just some other incomprehensible thing
in other words they endorse the
supernatural but just with a slight name
change from God to ex their favored
incomprehensible thing like aliens or
super intelligence or the successor
Theory to Quantum Theory whatever it
happens to be but David Deutsch's
conception introduces people into this
picture as knowledge or explanation
creators so let me reintroduce a motion
now for the purposes of decision making
as this is one place where some people
do get stuck with my exposition of this
kind of thing how do we make decisions
especially in making decisions where we
don't have a good explanation because
yes sometimes we don't have a good
explanation if you have a good
explanation then you act on it perhaps
you want to decide where to build a
house one choice is a low-lying flat
area you make the decision not to build
the house there because it's prone to
floods good explanation logically
derived prediction reasonable decision
you build Instead at a higher altitude
somewhere no emotions required here
except perhaps appreciation of the
beauty of the place and that kind of
thing it is rational and all your
decisions are explained by good
explanations even good explanations
about things like you love this
particular peaceful and friendly
Community you want to build a house near
it emotions like that are also included
in our conception of good explanations
but yes it's true sometimes we lack a
good explanation or I should say a good
explicit explanation you cannot write
down exactly what you feel good or bad
about it's inexplicit inexplicit
knowledge is a thing if you have a bad
feeling about something but aren't quite
sure why that can be a kind of knowledge
intuitions can be a kind of knowledge
all knowledge explicit or not is prone
to containing errors indeed it all does
contain misconceptions because
correcting the misconceptions allows for
Progress to happen were there no errors
ever to correct in some domain nothing
would need to ever change so your
intuition can also be wrong we should
know this moreover unlike with explicit
explanations it can be much harder to
check errors in your intuition as their
difficult to communicate that's the
nature of the inexplicit but it does not
mean they should be ignored intuitions I
mean all knowledge actually contains
some inexplicit content only a small
fraction is explicit good explanations
but intuitions are real we all have
emotions but some people rate their
emotions as being strong and some not so
strong what you experience is terrifying
I may not what you experience is
slightly happy I may experience as a
deep joy we can't communicate our
emotions easily by saying how strong
they feel to us because how you feel and
how I feel may be very different like
the age-old conundrum of whether the
Blue Sky we are both looking at looks
the same to us this is the problem of
qualia we have them we cannot describe
them they are the subjective contents of
objective things like wavelength of
light which is how physics quantifies
and explains color from the objective
side of things no reference to the
content of Minds no reference to
psychology is needed but there is a
world of subjective experience how
colors look and how feelings feel you
may have an intuition that a particular
neighborhood is not safe there are cues
graffiti on walls broken windows young
men of a certain age wearing a certain
kind of clothing that's all quite
explicit but even if you could explain
all of that away you still have the
heebie-jeebies for some reason but that
doesn't prevent your intuition and
explicit ideas from being completely
mistaken maybe unlikely perhaps but
maybe it's a perfectly nice Community
that's just been through a rough time
with the natural disaster and so your
intuition is misfiring perhaps everyone
in this derelict Community is actually
very nice and indeed it's a perfectly
safe place now in any case you cannot
quantify with a number using some
measuring device your level of
discomfort you can try and raise it on a
scale of one to ten but your rating
tells me nothing about the objective
situation your scale for your rating of
your level of discomfort could be
completely different to mine maybe
you're just a particularly fearful
person or maybe you're unusually used to
such neighborhoods and not scared at all
when in fact you should be so that is
the place of emotions if we don't have a
good explanation we might rely on them
but we cannot quantify them our fears
and hopes are very subjective and
knowledge in the main is not about fear
or hope or certainty but if we need to
make a decision then it's black and
white either we have a good explanation
to act on or we do not and if we do not
then we just don't know and it's fine to
say we don't know if you want to invest
in a company you might not know indeed
you will not know how it's going to
perform in the future because the future
is unknowable but you can know which is
to say have good explanations of the
company itself and the culture of the
company they're who the people are the
CEO the team the workers their ethic and
their products that is knowledge and can
inform your decision but beyond that you
don't know and rationally it shouldn't
come down to just a Vibe A vibe is a
kind of inexplicit knowledge maybe you
have that when it comes to people some
people of course do seem a bit dodgy are
they cranks are they trying to Swindle
you are they lying those are intuitions
inexplicit knowledge you should take
seriously you might be wrong but it
might be a reason to take due diligence
even further and investigate more what
is the history of the CEO what's his
last company in trouble for breaking the
law that's more explicit knowledge that
could be useful for you in making a
decision and again we're not then
relying purely on guesswork here and
emotion to make a decision about
investing or not it's not about
confidence but no knowledge and good
explanations it's not about just feeling
good or feeling bad but knowledge even
the decision about who to marry or spend
your life with or who your friends are
is not all just about feelings of course
Love's a feeling the most valuable one
perhaps but that you love your family
and friends is knowledge itself you're
not confident you love your family and
friends you know you do it's explicit
knowledge about a subjective emotion
there's no contradiction here but it's
true some people think all of knowledge
is about emotions like this feelings
feelings that serve not just a
peripheral but a central role especially
in decision making some think that
knowledge is less about explanations and
more about predictions they are obsessed
by trying to guess what the future will
bring and trying to distill epistemology
into a kind of decision engine that is
the purpose of knowledge for example
under bayesianism and in a sense why
bayesianism is so popular nowadays
people are very very animated some seem
to be obsessed with trying to guess what
the future will bring they call it
forecasting or predicting but it's
prophecy it is a guess about the Future
made in the absence of a good
explanation after all anyone who has a
good explanation just explains that good
explanation and then we all go ah okay I
get it that makes sense like a physicist
who predicts that when you drop a rock
out a particular window it's going to
take precisely 3.2 seconds to hit the
ground below that's a prediction but
when human choice is involved and human
choice is determined by human creativity
Things become inherently unpredictable
it's just not like physics and dropping
rocks out of Windows sure all things
that happen anywhere ever must be
consistent with the laws of physics but
that is a vacuous truism which applies
to any physical process that happens
anywhere anytime all physical processes
are computable we've already said that
but knowing that some computer somewhere
sometime could in principle be
constructed to emulate the workings of
the human brain down to the motion of
individual electrons does nothing to
enable us to predict what that brain
would do next what it would compute what
it would explain for to simulate such a
brain would be to be a mind a simulation
of a mind is a mind in the same way that
simulating the process of addition or
multiplication is to actually add or
multiply there is no distance between
simulating an abstract process and the
process itself and to simulate something
actually creative would be to be
something actually creative and thus
rule out the possibility of predicting
what it would do which is another reason
why the doomers especially the AGI or
super intelligent doomers who attempt to
do psychology on such systems have it
all backwards we cannot predict the
output of a creative entity a person in
other words except in one sense we can
reliably predict or say a that it will
do the unexpected humans adults
teenagers children alien intelligence
and AGI all share the same quality we
can predict they will do the entirely
unexpected and unpredictable we can
never say precisely what they will do
they are creative and we cannot know
what choices they will invent on the
spot much less decide to make look we
can't even know what we ourselves will
choose to do in a few hours from now
given we do not know exactly the state
of the world we will occupy in a few
hours from now necessitating us to
change our own plans we are knowledge
creators the most cosmically significant
entities in the universe and we are that
precisely because the knowledge we
create Flies free of our minds and
transforms physical reality it is the
abstract Catalyst a Constructor of
matter turning much of it into resources
and the more matter we control and
resources we have the more wealth we
have and thus the more powerful we
become able to solve our problems and
protect civilization and our lives thus
Illuminating the darkness of space here
enlightening it a brightness in the
implacable Darkness
to riff upon jaira Tolkien knowledge is
a spark to rekindle light when other
lights go out
[Music]
oh